feat(immutable-arraybuffer): freezable virtual typedarrays (mirror of endojs/endo#3164) (#417)
endojs/endo-but-for-bots: packages/immutable-arraybuffer/README.md

Reviewer: This is stale from when ocapn byte-arrays were mapped to immutable ArrayBuffers rather than frozen TypedArrays.

Reviewer: Now that this package provides two, this title should be parallel to the other one:

```md
## The Immutable ArrayBuffer Ponyfill
```

Reviewer: My mistake: If the platform is deficient in this way, the pony's `optTransferBufferToImmutable` will be undefined and the shim will not add an `ArrayBuffer.prototype.transferToImmutable`, allowing its absence to be feature tested.

Reviewer: > Without either, the ponyfill and shim fail to initialize.

My mistake. This is wrong. Both will initialize but testably fail to provide the impossible transfer method.

Reviewer: Now that immutable ArrayBuffer has reached stage 3, these best practices no longer apply. Instead, the shim should just do nothing if it sees a native implementation.

The emulated immutable buffers inherit directly from an intermediate prototype we refer to as `immutableArrayBufferPrototype`. This intermediate prototype contains all the methods and read-only accessor properties proposed here, as well as overrides of those inherited from `ArrayBuffer.prototype` as needed to emulate the behavior of an immutable instance. For each emulated immutable buffer, the implementation encapsulates a genuine `ArrayBuffer` that it has exclusive access to, so it can enforce immutability simply by never modifying it.

## The Freezable TypedArray Ponyfill

> The package also provides a companion ponyfill for *freezable virtual TypedArrays*, exposed as `freezable-typedarray-pony.js`. The motivation parallels the immutable `ArrayBuffer`: a `TypedArray` view onto an immutable buffer would itself be observably immutable, but the language does not yet permit a real `TypedArray` exotic object to be frozen. The ponyfill provides emulated views that present the proposed observable shape on top of an emulated immutable backing store.

Reviewer: should be "observably freezable"

Reviewer: > the language does not yet permit a real `TypedArray` exotic object to be frozen

Nit: Not exactly true. The language does allow a real `TypedArray` to be frozen if it is empty.

Two callable exports are available:
- `makePseudoTypedArrayConstructor(OriginalConstructor)` returns a constructor that, when called with an emulated immutable `ArrayBuffer` as its sole argument, returns a freezable view whose prototype overrides the `TypedArray` mutators to throw and whose `buffer` accessor returns the emulated immutable buffer. When called with any other argument list it falls through to `OriginalConstructor`, so callers can use a single constructor uniformly across mutable and immutable buffers.
- `virtualTypedArrayBufferGetter` is a `buffer`-getter function suitable for installation as the replacement of `TypedArray.prototype.buffer` by a shim. It transparently returns the emulated immutable buffer for emulated freezable views and the genuine buffer for genuine views.

> The `*Internal` prototype, the brand-check `WeakMap`, and the `getHiddenTypedArray` accessor are deliberately not exported: the ponyfill keeps the emulation's encapsulation just as the immutable-`ArrayBuffer` ponyfill keeps `hiddenBuffers` private to the package. Callers should construct freezable views only through `makePseudoTypedArrayConstructor`.

Reviewer: What is the `*` in
```md
`*Internal`
```
?

Reviewer: For not immutable ArrayBuffer and freezable TypedArrays, the prototypes are not exported, but neither are they encapsulated. The knowingly leak view prototype navigation from the emulated instances. They are designed to be safely discoverable by untrusted Hardened JS code. The others are truly encapsulated, in that their leakage would be an exploitable security vulnerability.

## Using the Ponyfills Across Native and Shim

> A program that wants to be source-compatible with both a future native implementation of the *Immutable ArrayBuffer* proposal and the present-day shim should import the ponyfill's named exports rather than reaching for the methods on `ArrayBuffer.prototype`. The ponyfill's exports fall through to the native methods when present and emulate them when absent, so the calling code does not need to detect which case it is in.

Reviewer 2: Please create and adopt an eslint rule that enforces this in our `@endo/eslint-plugin` for all consumers.

> A program that wants to be source-compatible with both a future native implementation of the *Immutable ArrayBuffer* proposal and the present-day shim should import the ponyfill's named exports rather than reaching for the methods on `ArrayBuffer.prototype`. The ponyfill's exports fall through to the native methods when present and emulate them when absent, so the calling code does not need to detect which case it is in.

Reviewer: As of the commit I'm currently reviewing, we do not yet fall through to the native code when present, though that is the plan.

Reviewer: In any case, once this is repaired and the shim is complete, I disagree with 

>  program that wants to be source-compatible with both a future native implementation of the *Immutable ArrayBuffer* proposal and the present-day shim should import the ponyfill's named exports rather than reaching for the methods on `ArrayBuffer.prototype`. 

program that wants to be source-compatible with both a future native implementation of the *Immutable ArrayBuffer* proposal and the present-day shim should just import (and thereby activate) the shim. I don't see why anything other than low level plumbing, such as (only?) the shim itself should ever use the ponyfill directly. I know you (@kriskowal ) have explained this to me before, but I either never understood or was not convinced.

If immutable ArrayBuffers had not yet reached stage 3, then I can see the argument. But they have.

Reviewer: Maybe the later commits introducing and explaining the spackle make this a non-issue?

The canonical idiom is:

```js
import {
  sliceBufferToImmutable,
  isBufferImmutable,
  // optTransferBufferToImmutable may be undefined on
  // platforms that lack both structuredClone and
  // ArrayBuffer.prototype.transfer (Node <= 16, some
  // JavaScriptCore versions, Hermes). Guard the import
  // site if your code path is reachable there.
  optTransferBufferToImmutable,

> } from '@endo/immutable-arraybuffer';

Reviewer: Oh, I had not remembered that I export all the members of the immutable ArrayBuffer pony by default. We should either reform that to correspond to my bad memory, or an explicit export, or we should export all members of the freezable TypedArray pony as part of this default bundle. I'd rather do the reform, so this package has no default exports. Since nothing yet imports outside the repo, we can just reform without doing the deprecation dance.

const ab = new ArrayBuffer(8);
new Uint8Array(ab).set([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]);

const immutable = sliceBufferToImmutable(ab);
isBufferImmutable(immutable); // true

if (optTransferBufferToImmutable) {
  const transferred = optTransferBufferToImmutable(ab);
  isBufferImmutable(transferred); // true
}
```

> The corresponding pattern for freezable virtual `TypedArrays` builds a constructor once per realm and uses it everywhere a `TypedArray` view is wanted, regardless of whether the backing buffer is mutable or immutable:

Reviewer 2: This is where we need a spackle. There needs to be one TypedArray constructor per realm. We need portable patterns for instanceof checks, construction, and usage of typed arrays that may be backed by immutable array buffers. We need the practices to appear idiomatic in terms of imports from the spackle module and for non-portable usage to be discouraged by eslint.

The `makePseudoTypedArrayConstructor` should be internal and not exposed to dependent modules.

```js
import { sliceBufferToImmutable } from '@endo/immutable-arraybuffer';
import { makePseudoTypedArrayConstructor } from '@endo/immutable-arraybuffer/freezable-typedarray-pony.js';

const FreezableUint8Array = makePseudoTypedArrayConstructor(Uint8Array);

// Works with a mutable buffer: falls through to Uint8Array.
const mutableView = new FreezableUint8Array(new ArrayBuffer(4));

// Works with an emulated immutable buffer: returns a
// freezable view whose mutators throw.
const immutable = sliceBufferToImmutable(new ArrayBuffer(4));
const frozenView = new FreezableUint8Array(immutable);
```

Two preconditions let this code run the same way under the shim and under a future native implementation:

> 1. *Either* the program imports `@endo/immutable-arraybuffer/shim.js` at startup *or* it never reaches for `arrayBuffer.sliceToImmutable(...)` and `arrayBuffer.transferToImmutable(...)` and `arrayBuffer.immutable` on a bare `ArrayBuffer`. The ponyfill exports remain a stable interface either way; the methods on `ArrayBuffer.prototype` only exist after the shim runs or after a native implementation ships. A program that wants to be portable should pick one of these disciplines and stay with it.

Reviewer 2: In my opinion, we should improve developer experience by not obligating consumers to run the shim, but not discouraging its use either. We need to test the encouraged usage through spackle on all variations of Node.js with and without lockdown, with and without immutable arraybuffer shim. If we can use `@endo/bytes` to provide a uniform and ergonomic pattern of usage instead of relying on the `immutable-arraybuffer` package, all the better.

> 2. The program does not assume `x instanceof ArrayBuffer` distinguishes immutable from mutable. Both the proposal and this package's emulated immutable buffers inherit from `ArrayBuffer.prototype`, so they are both instances. The way to ask whether a particular buffer is immutable is `isBufferImmutable(x)` (or `x.immutable` if the shim or a native implementation is in effect).

Reviewer 2: Great.

The same discipline applies to the freezable `TypedArray` ponyfill: import `makePseudoTypedArrayConstructor` and use the resulting constructor wherever the program might want to view an immutable buffer; the emulated path and the genuine path agree on the observable shape.

### Detecting and adapting to a native implementation

A program that wants a single hot-path that works regardless of whether the platform has a native `transferToImmutable` (or a native freezable view) can sense it by feature-detecting the ponyfill's optional export and the buffer methods:

```js
import {
  sliceBufferToImmutable,
  isBufferImmutable,
  optTransferBufferToImmutable,
} from '@endo/immutable-arraybuffer';

// Will be defined on Node >= 17 (structuredClone) or
// Node >= 21 (ArrayBuffer.prototype.transfer); undefined
// on platforms that have neither.
const canTransfer = optTransferBufferToImmutable !== undefined;
```

The presence of native `ArrayBuffer.prototype.immutable` on a fresh `new ArrayBuffer(0)` indicates that a native implementation or the shim is in effect:

```js
const hasNativeOrShim = 'immutable' in new ArrayBuffer(0);
```

> Programs that prefer not to feature-detect can require the shim at startup (importing `@endo/immutable-arraybuffer/shim.js` from the first module loaded) and treat `arrayBuffer.sliceToImmutable(...)`, `arrayBuffer.transferToImmutable(...)`, and `arrayBuffer.immutable` as available throughout the realm; modern shim practice in this package's caveats below covers what happens when a native implementation later lands underneath the shim.

Reviewer: The point of the `canTransfer` issue is that, post shim, `arrayBuffer.sliceToImmutable` and `arrayBuffer.immutable` would both be present but, on the deficient platform stated, `arrayBuffer.transferToImmutable` would be absent. So even when using the shim, if you want to work on a possibly deficient platform, you either need to feature test for, or avoid using, `arrayBuffer.transferToImmutable`.

At https://github.com/concordancejs/concordance/blob/791d2a89b40eb13f2c889ac270dd8be190cf8073/lib/describe.js#L36 Node's concordance, in order to render diagnostic output for an object, sniffs the result of `toString()`. If the result seems to indicate that the object is an ArrayBuffer, then concordance assumes it can do things with the object (`Buffer.from`) that can only be done on genuine ArrayBuffers. To avoid this, the ponyfill and shim ensures that the sniff will not match `'ArrayBuffer'`.

Ava also uses Node's concordance for its diagnostic output, which is how we discovered the problem.

## Proposed XS / Node.js Parity Tests

> The *Immutable ArrayBuffer* proposal is a shape contract: the same buffer-creation, view-construction, and frozen-view-mutator-rejection sequence should behave the same way regardless of which JavaScript engine is running it. Two of Endo's target engines, Moddable XS and Node.js, are the most demanding pair because XS uses the proposal natively (or will, once it lands) on devices where ROM-backed buffers are first-class, and Node.js will host most of the testing.

Reviewer: What's a "shape contract"?

> To verify this parity by construction rather than by prose, the package will follow the parity-test pattern landed elsewhere in the monorepo (`packages/compartment-mapper/test/cycle-rename*`, `packages/compartment-mapper/test/cycle-cjs-reexporter*`, and friends): a shared fixture and shared assertions module exercised by an XS-side test and a Node-side test, both calling the same expectations. The proposed shape for this package:

Reviewer: Cool!

The [spackle](https://docs.endojs.org/documents/spackle.html) pattern describes a module that installs a behavior on a shared intrinsic at a registered symbol and exports an ergonomic callable; the first instance to load wins the race, and subsequent instances find the property already defined and call through. `@endo/harden` is the canonical example: `Object[Symbol.for('harden')]` is the rendezvous; the ergonomic `harden` is the export.

`@endo/bytes` is a near-fit for the same shape. It already provides ergonomic functions that work on `Uint8Array` values whose backing buffer may be an immutable `ArrayBuffer` (`bytesToImmutable`, `bytesFromImmutable`, `concatImmutables`), and it explicitly papers over a portability gap: immutable `ArrayBuffer`s cannot back a `Uint8Array` view directly, and APIs like `TextDecoder.decode` reject them. The spackle question is whether to install these behaviors on a shared intrinsic so all instances of `@endo/bytes` in a realm agree on the implementation, and so a future TC39 standard (or an XS native) can sit at the rendezvous.

### What spackling `@endo/bytes` would mean

Three operations are candidates for the rendezvous-symbol install:

> 1. `bytesToImmutable(view) -> ArrayBuffer`. The current implementation calls `sliceBufferToImmutable` from `@endo/immutable-arraybuffer` and hardens the result. A spackle would install at, e.g., `Object[Symbol.for('endo.bytesToImmutable')]`, race the first writer, and have subsequent loads of `@endo/bytes` call through to the installed function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `bytesToImmutable(view) -> ArrayBuffer`. The current implementation calls `sliceBufferToImmutable` from `@endo/immutable-arraybuffer` and hardens the result. A spackle would install at, e.g., `ArrayBuffer.prototype[Symbol.for('sliceBufferToImmutable')]`, race the first writer, and have subsequent loads of `@endo/bytes` call through to the installed function.
```

2. `bytesFromImmutable(buffer) -> Uint8Array`. Same shape: a registered symbol, an installed callable, the ergonomic export prefers the installed one.
3. `concatImmutables(buffers) -> ArrayBuffer`. Same shape.

The `bytesEqual`, `bytesFromText`, `bytesToText`, and `concatBytes` functions are not candidates for spackle: they operate purely on `Uint8Array` and have no realm-wide identity concern (no eval-twin recognition problem, no shared `WeakSet` to dedupe, no install-site contention with a future native API). They are conventional ponyfills and should stay that way.

### Required changes to `@endo/bytes`

To turn the three immutable-aware operations into spackles:

- Add an install-and-prefer-install dance for each of the three functions, modeled on `@endo/harden`'s pattern. The export becomes:

  ```js
  // sketch only; actual implementation would mirror @endo/harden

>   const SYMBOL = Symbol.for('endo.bytesToImmutable');

Reviewer 2: The symbol will also need to be in SES permits. Using SES with immutable array buffers requires SES to install the immutable arraybuffer shim, where it is not required without lockdown.
